Build a Local AI Email Auto-Responder with n8n and Ollama
Objective
Build a fully local, private AI email auto-responder using n8n for workflow automation and Ollama for on-device LLM inference. You will learn to orchestrate services with Docker Compose, integrate a local LLM into an automation workflow, and manage email protocols programmatically. This project is highly relevant for creating powerful, privacy-preserving AI systems that operate without cloud dependencies, a crucial skill in an era of data sensitivity and rising API costs.

Description
1. Project Overview and Background
Welcome to a hands-on project at the intersection of workflow automation, artificial intelligence, and data privacy. You will build an intelligent email auto-responder that runs entirely on your local machine. Unlike solutions that rely on third-party APIs like OpenAI or Google, this system ensures that your data (in this case, your emails) never leaves your environment. This is achieved by combining two powerful open-source tools: n8n for workflow orchestration and Ollama for running large language models (LLMs) locally.

The core idea is to create a system that can read an incoming email, understand its content and intent, and generate a human-like, contextually relevant reply. This is not a simple "out-of-office" reply; it's a smart agent capable of handling initial queries, categorizing requests, or even answering simple questions, all powered by a local LLM. This project will teach you how to build practical AI applications that are cost-effective, private, and completely under your control.

Why Local AI?
Privacy: Your data is never sent to a third-party service. This is critical for applications handling sensitive or personal information.
Cost: Running local models eliminates API call costs, which can become significant at scale. The only cost is the hardware you already own.
Control & Customization: You have full control over the model, the prompts, and the entire system's logic. You can fine-tune models for specific tasks without being constrained by a provider's terms of service.
Offline Capability: The system can operate without an internet connection (aside from fetching the emails themselves).

2. Core Technologies Deep Dive
To succeed in this project, you must understand the role of each component. Let's break them down.

n8n: The Automation Engine
n8n is an extendable workflow automation tool. It allows you to connect different applications and services through a visual, node-based interface. Think of it as the central nervous system of our project.

Nodes: Each node in n8n represents a specific action or application. For this project, you'll use nodes for reading emails (IMAP), making HTTP requests (to Ollama), implementing conditional logic (IF), and sending emails (SMTP).
Workflows: A workflow is a collection of connected nodes that define a sequence of operations. Our entire auto-responder logic will be encapsulated in a single n8n workflow.
Triggers: A trigger is a special node that starts a workflow. Our trigger will be the "Email Read (IMAP)" node, which will activate whenever a new email arrives.
Credentials: n8n securely stores credentials (like email passwords or API keys) so you don't have to hardcode them into your workflow.
Ollama: Your Local LLM Server
Ollama is a tool that dramatically simplifies the process of downloading and running state-of-the-art open-source LLMs like Llama 3, Mistral, and Phi-3. It packages these models into a ready-to-use service and exposes a simple REST API for interacting with them.

Local Inference: Ollama handles all the complexities of setting up the model and running inference on your local hardware (CPU or GPU).
API Endpoint: It provides a consistent API endpoint (typically http://localhost:11434/api/generate) that we can call from our n8n workflow to get a response from the LLM. This decouples the AI model from our automation logic.
Model Management: You can easily pull different models from the Ollama library using a single command (e.g., ollama pull llama3:8b).
Docker and Docker Compose: The Environment Manager
Since our system consists of multiple services (n8n and Ollama) that need to run and communicate with each other, we need a way to manage them effectively. Docker and Docker Compose are the industry standard for this.

Docker: A platform for developing, shipping, and running applications in containers. A container packages up an application's code along with all its dependencies, ensuring it runs consistently across different environments.
Docker Compose: A tool for defining and running multi-container Docker applications. We will use a docker-compose.yml file to define our two services, their configurations, the network they share, and any volumes they need for persistent data.

3. System Architecture and Design
The architecture is a straightforward pipeline that processes emails. The data flows from your email server, through the n8n workflow for processing and enrichment via Ollama, and back to the email server to send the reply.
Here is a diagram illustrating the complete data flow:

Detailed Data Flow Breakdown:
Email Arrival: An external email is sent to the address you've configured.
n8n IMAP Trigger: The n8n workflow, which is constantly polling the IMAP server, detects the new email and starts an execution. It ingests the email's data, including sender, subject, body, and message ID.
Loop Prevention: The first crucial step is an IF node that checks if the email should be processed. It might check if the sender is the same as the auto-responder's address or if the subject line already contains our auto-reply tag (e.g., "Re: AI Auto-Reply:"). This prevents infinite loops where your bot replies to its own replies.
Prompt Formatting: A node (e.g., a "Set" or "Code" node) takes the raw subject and body of the email and formats it into a clear, structured prompt for the LLM. This is a critical step in getting good responses. A good prompt might look like this:
You are a professional and helpful email assistant. A new email has arrived. Please write a concise and relevant reply.

Sender: {{ sender_email }}
Subject: {{ email_subject }}
Body:
{{ email_body }}

Your reply should be helpful and directly address the content of the email. Do not include a greeting or signature; provide only the body of the reply.
Ollama API Call: The HTTP Request node sends this formatted prompt in a POST request to the Ollama service's /api/generate endpoint. Since both services are in the same Docker network, n8n can address Ollama directly by its service name (e.g., http://ollama:11434/api/generate).
LLM Inference: Ollama receives the request, passes the prompt to the loaded LLM (e.g., llama3:8b), and generates a response.
Response Parsing & Sending: The HTTP Request node in n8n receives the JSON response from Ollama. A subsequent node extracts the actual text content from the response. Finally, the "Send Email (SMTP)" node constructs the reply. Crucially, it uses the Message-ID of the original email to set the In-Reply-To and References headers, ensuring the reply appears as part of the same conversation thread in email clients.
Workflow Completion: The workflow execution is logged as successful in the n8n UI.


4. Step-by-Step Implementation Guide
Follow these steps to build the system from the ground up.
Step 1: Setting Up the Docker Environment
Your first task is to create the docker-compose.yml file. This file will be the foundation of your project.
# docker-compose.yml (example structure)
version: '3.8'

services:
  n8n:
    image: n8nio/n8n
    container_name: n8n_responder
    ports:
      - "5678:5678"
    environment:
      - N8N_HOST=localhost
      - N8N_PORT=5678
      - N8N_PROTOCOL=http
      # Add other n8n env vars as needed
    volumes:
      - n8n_data:/home/node/.n8n
    networks:
      - ai_responder_net
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD-SHELL", "wget -q --spider --proxy=off http://localhost:5678/healthz || exit 1"]
      interval: 30s
      timeout: 10s
      retries: 3

  ollama:
    image: ollama/ollama
    container_name: ollama_responder
    volumes:
      - ollama_data:/root/.ollama
    networks:
      - ai_responder_net
    # If you have an Nvidia GPU, you can add deployment configs here
    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "ollama", "ps"]
      interval: 30s
      timeout: 10s
      retries: 3

volumes:
  n8n_data:
  ollama_data:

networks:
  ai_responder_net:


Why this structure?

Services: We define n8n and ollama as two distinct services.
Volumes: We use named volumes (n8n_data, ollama_data) to persist data. This ensures your n8n workflows and downloaded Ollama models are not lost when you restart the containers.
Network: We create a custom bridge network (ai_responder_net) so the containers can communicate with each other using their service names as hostnames (e.g., http://ollama:11434).
Healthchecks: These are crucial for ensuring that one service doesn't try to communicate with another before it's ready.

Step 2: Configuring and Testing Ollama
Once your docker-compose.yml is ready, start the services:

docker-compose up -d
After the containers are running, you need to pull an LLM into your Ollama instance. You can do this by executing a command inside the running Ollama container:

docker exec -it ollama_responder ollama pull llama3:8b
To verify that Ollama is working and the model is available, you can send a curl request to its API from your host machine (since you haven't exposed its port, you'll do this from within the n8n container later, but for an initial check, you can expose the port 11434:11434 temporarily).

Step 3: Building the n8n Workflow
Navigate to http://localhost:5678 in your browser to access the n8n UI. Create a new, blank workflow.

Add the IMAP Trigger: Search for the "Email Read (IMAP)" node and add it to your canvas. You will need to create new credentials for it, providing your email server's IMAP host, port, username, and password. Configure it to trigger for "Unread" messages in your "INBOX".
Add the Loop Prevention IF Node: Add an "IF" node and connect it to the IMAP trigger. Set up a condition to check if the sender's email address is the same as your own. You can use an expression like {{ $json.from.address }}. You can add another OR condition to check if the subject starts with your reply prefix.
Add the HTTP Request Node for Ollama: Add an "HTTP Request" node. Connect it to the true output of the IF node.
URL: http://ollama:11434/api/generate
Method: POST
Body Content Type: JSON
Body: This is where you construct the JSON payload for Ollama. Click "Add Expression" for the body and create a structure like this:
{
  "model": "llama3:8b",
  "stream": false,
  "prompt": "You are a helpful assistant. A new email has arrived from {{ $json.from.address }}. The subject is '{{ $json.subject }}'. The body is: \n\n{{ $json.text }}.\n\nPlease write a suitable reply. Only provide the reply body, without any greeting or signature."
}
Add the SMTP Send Node: Add a "Send Email (SMTP)" node. Connect it to the HTTP Request node. Configure its credentials similarly to the IMAP node.
To: Use an expression to get the sender's address: {{ $json.from.address }}.
Subject: Prepend "Re: " to the original subject: Re: {{ $json.subject }}.
Text: This is where you use the output from the Ollama node. The expression will look something like this: {{ $node["HTTP Request"].json.response }}. You need to get the response field from the JSON returned by Ollama.
Crucial Step - Threading: Go to "Options" -> "Add Option" -> "Message To Reply To". For the "Message-ID" field, use an expression to pass the ID of the original email: {{ $json.messageId }}. This is the key to maintaining email threads.

Step 4: Finalizing and Exporting
Activate your workflow in the n8n UI. Once you are satisfied with its functionality, you must export it. Click the "Download" button in the workflow editor to save the workflow as a workflow.json file. Place this file in the root of your project repository.
5. Testing and Verification
To test your system end-to-end:

Ensure your Docker containers are running and healthy (docker-compose ps).
Send an email from a different account to the email address you configured in the n8n IMAP trigger.
Go to the n8n UI and look at "Executions". You should see a new workflow execution start.
Click on the execution to inspect the data flow. Check the output of each node to ensure the data is being passed and transformed correctly.
Check the inbox of the account you sent the email from. You should receive a reply within a minute or two.
Verify that the reply appears in the same conversation thread as the original email.
Send another email from your auto-responder's own address to itself. Verify that the workflow is triggered but stops at the IF node, preventing a loop.
6. FAQ
Q: My n8n container can't connect to the Ollama container. What's wrong?

A: This is almost always a Docker networking issue. Ensure both containers are on the same custom network in your docker-compose.yml. Use the service name (ollama) as the hostname in the HTTP Request node URL, not localhost. The correct URL is http://ollama:11434/api/generate.

Q: Ollama is running, but the API call fails with a model not found error.

A: Make sure you have successfully pulled the model into the Ollama instance running inside the container. Use docker exec -it ollama_responder ollama list to see which models are available. The model name in your HTTP request body ("model": "llama3:8b") must exactly match the name of a model in that list.

Q: How do I handle sensitive information like my email password?

A: Do not hardcode credentials in your docker-compose.yml or workflow.json. Use environment variables. n8n is designed to read credentials from environment variables. Define them in a .env file (which you should add to .gitignore) and reference them in your docker-compose.yml. Your submitted .env.example file should list the variable names but with placeholder values.

Q: The LLM response is not what I expected. How can I improve it?

A: This is where prompt engineering comes in. The quality of your output is highly dependent on the quality of your input prompt. Be very specific in your instructions to the model in the HTTP Request node. Tell it about its persona ("You are a professional assistant"), the context, and the exact format you want the output in ("Only provide the reply body"). Experiment with different prompts to get the desired result.

Core Requirements
1.
The project must contain a docker-compose.yml file at the root that defines and configures the n8n and ollama services.

Contract Specification
File Location: docker-compose.yml
Required Services:
n8n: Must use a valid n8n image (e.g., n8nio/n8n).
ollama: Must use a valid Ollama image (e.g., ollama/ollama).
Networking: Both services must be connected to the same custom bridge network.
Health Checks: Both the n8n and ollama services must have a healthcheck defined to ensure they are running correctly.
Volumes: Both services must use named volumes to persist their data (.n8n directory for n8n, /root/.ollama for ollama).
Verification
Run docker-compose up -d --build.
Verify that two containers, one for n8n and one for ollama, are created and running.
Run docker-compose ps and verify that the status of both containers becomes healthy within 3 minutes.
2.
The Ollama service must be configured to automatically have a specific LLM available for inference upon startup. The recommended model is llama3:8b.

Contract Specification
Model Name: llama3:8b (or another small, suitable model specified in the README).
Configuration: The model should be pulled either via a startup script, a custom Dockerfile that extends the base Ollama image, or clear instructions in the README on the single command to run after docker-compose up.
Verification
After the services are up and healthy, execute a command to check the Ollama API for available models.
Send a GET request to http://<ollama_container_ip>:11434/api/tags.
Verify that the JSON response contains an object where the name field matches the required model (e.g., llama3:8b).
3.
The complete and functional n8n workflow must be exported and included in the repository.

Contract Specification
File Location: workflow.json in the root of the repository.
Format: The file must be a valid JSON export from n8n, containing the nodes, connections, and credentials configuration for the workflow.
Verification
Check for the existence of workflow.json at the repository root.
Attempt to parse the file as JSON.
Verify the JSON contains top-level keys such as name, nodes, and connections.
4.
The n8n workflow must be triggered by new emails using the IMAP protocol.

Contract Specification
Node Type: The workflow must start with a trigger node of type n8n-nodes-base.emailReadImap.
Configuration: The node should be configured to check a specific IMAP folder (e.g., INBOX) for unread messages.
Verification
Parse the workflow.json file.
Find the node object where the type property is n8n-nodes-base.emailReadImap.
Verify this node is a trigger (has no nodes connecting to its input).
5.
The workflow must make an HTTP POST request to the local Ollama service to generate a response.

Contract Specification
Node Type: The workflow must contain a node of type n8n-nodes-base.httpRequest.
Request Details:
Method: POST
URL: http://ollama:11434/api/generate (must use the service name ollama, not localhost or an IP address).
Body: The request body must be JSON and contain model and prompt keys.
Verification
Parse workflow.json and find the n8n-nodes-base.httpRequest node.
Verify its parameters object contains the correct method, url, and a body structure that sends a JSON object.
6.
The prompt sent to Ollama must be dynamically constructed using data from the incoming email.

Contract Specification
Prompt Content: The prompt string sent in the body of the HTTP request to Ollama must include expressions that reference the subject and body of the triggering email.
Example Expressions: The prompt should contain placeholders like {{ $json.subject }} and {{ $json.text }} or {{ $json.html }}.
Verification
Parse workflow.json and inspect the body parameter of the Ollama HTTP request node.
Verify that the prompt value is an expression string containing references to properties of an earlier node's JSON output (e.g., $json.subject).
7.
The workflow must correctly parse the response from the Ollama API to extract the generated text.

Contract Specification
Ollama Response Format: The Ollama API (with stream: false) returns a JSON object like {"response": "..."}.
Workflow Logic: A node subsequent to the Ollama HTTP request must reference the response field from the output of that request.
Verification
Parse workflow.json.
Identify the node that sends the email (e.g., n8n-nodes-base.emailSend).
Check the parameter for the email body (e.g., text). Its value must be an expression that references the output of the HTTP request node, specifically targeting the response key (e.g., {{ $node["HTTP Request"].json.response }}).
8.
The workflow must send the AI-generated response as an email using the SMTP protocol.

Contract Specification
Node Type: The workflow must contain a node of type n8n-nodes-base.emailSend.
Recipient: The to field must be dynamically set to the sender of the original email.
Verification
Parse workflow.json and find the n8n-nodes-base.emailSend node.
Verify its parameters.to field is set with an expression referencing the original sender's address (e.g., {{ $json.from.address }}).
9.
The sent email reply must correctly maintain the email conversation thread.

Contract Specification
Email Headers: The reply email must include the In-Reply-To and References headers, populated with the Message-ID of the original email.
n8n Configuration: In the "Send Email" node, the "Message To Reply To" -> "Message-ID" option must be set.
Verification
Parse workflow.json and find the n8n-nodes-base.emailSend node.
Inspect its parameters.options.messageId field.
Verify this field is set to an expression that dynamically uses the message ID of the trigger email (e.g., {{ $json.messageId }}).
10.
The workflow must include logic to prevent it from replying to its own messages, avoiding infinite loops.

Contract Specification
Node Type: The workflow must contain a logic node, such as n8n-nodes-base.if.
Condition: This node must execute after the trigger and before the Ollama request. It must check at least one of the following:
If the sender's email address is the same as the one used for sending replies.
If the email subject contains a specific auto-reply indicator (e.g., starts with "Re: AI Auto-Reply:").
Workflow Path: The Ollama request and email sending nodes must only be on the true path of this conditional logic.
Verification
Parse workflow.json and locate the n8n-nodes-base.if node.
Analyze its parameters.conditions to confirm it checks the sender or subject.
Analyze the connections data to ensure the HTTP Request node is connected to the true output (output_0) of the IF node.
11.
An .env.example file must be present to document all necessary environment variables.

Contract Specification
File Location: .env.example in the repository root.
Content: Must include placeholder variables for all required credentials and configurations, such as:
IMAP Host, User, Password, Port
SMTP Host, User, Password, Port
Any n8n-specific environment variables used (e.g., WEBHOOK_URL).
Verification
Check for the existence of .env.example.
Review its contents to ensure all necessary configuration variables are documented with placeholder values.
12.
A submission.json file must be provided with test email credentials for automated evaluation.

Contract Specification
File Location: submission.json in the repository root.
Required Structure:
{
  "emailCredentials": {
    "imap": {
      "host": "string",
      "port": "number",
      "user": "string",
      "password": "string"
    },
    "smtp": {
      "host": "string",
      "port": "number",
      "user": "string",
      "password": "string"
    }
  }
}
Verification
Check for the existence of submission.json.
Parse the file as JSON and validate its structure against the specified schema.
